Skip to content

__[![Pratham](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/pratham-
logo.svg)](https://pratham.org/)

  * [About Us](https://pratham.org/about/)
    * [Board](https://pratham.org/about/board/)
    * [Leadership](https://pratham.org/about/leadership/)
    * [Partners](https://pratham.org/about/partners/)
    * [Teaching at the Right Level](https://pratham.org/about/teaching-at-the-right-level/)
    * [Recognition](https://pratham.org/about/recognition/)
    * [What’s New](https://pratham.org/about/news/)
    * [Legal & Financial Information](https://pratham.org/about/legal-financial-information/)
  * Programs
    * [Education](https://pratham.org/programs/education/)
      * [Hamara Gaon](https://pratham.org/about/hamara-gaon/)
      * [Early Childhood Education](https://pratham.org/programs/education/early-childhood-education/)
      * [Elementary](https://pratham.org/programs/education/elementary/)
      * [Second Chance](https://pratham.org/slider/second-chance-slider/)
      * [Digital Initiatives](https://pratham.org/programs/education/digital-initiatives/)
    * [Vocational Training](https://pratham.org/programs/education/vocational-training/)
    * [Pratham Council For Vulnerable Children](https://pratham.org/programs/pratham-council-for-vulnerablechildren/)
    * [Annual Status of Education Report](https://pratham.org/programs/education/aser/)
  * Get Involved
    * [Job Opportunities](https://pratham.org/get-involved/job-opportunities/)
    * [Internships](https://pratham.org/get-involved/internships/)
  * Resources
    * [Pratham Digital](https://prathamopenschool.org/)
    * [Stories of Change](https://pratham.org/impact/)
    * [Blogs](https://pratham.org/blogs/)
    * Campaigns
      * [IAmPratham](https://pratham.org/iampratham/)
      * [Daan utsav](https://pratham.org/daan-utsav-2/)
      * [CAMaL Ka Camp](https://pratham.org/camal-ka-camp-2023/)
    * [Publications](https://pratham.org/resources/publications/)
    * [Annual Reports](https://pratham.org/about/annual-reports/)
  * [Contact](https://pratham.org/contact/)

[Donate](https://www.pratham.org/get-involved/donate)

# Board

###  Introduction

Our Board comprises of leaders from major corporations, experts across
industries, and passionate philanthropists. These visionaries guide us, keep
us focused on our mission, and help us deliver on our ambitious goals. Their
support empowers us to continue to innovate and grow and create impact for
millions of children and youth.

  * [![](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/AP-150x150.jpg)](https://pratham.org/2019/02/08/ajay-g-piramal-chairman-pratham-education-foundation/)

[Ajay G. Piramal (Chairman, Pratham Education
Foundation)](https://pratham.org/2019/02/08/ajay-g-piramal-chairman-pratham-
education-foundation/)

Mr. Piramal is the Chairman of the Board at Pratham Education Foundation. He
leads the Piramal Group, a diversified conglomerate with a presence across 100
countries. Under his leadership, the Piramal Group evolved from a textile-
centric business to a USD-2-billion conglomerate. Mr. Piramal holds an Honors
degree in Science from the University of Mumbai, and…[read
more](https://pratham.org/2019/02/08/ajay-g-piramal-chairman-pratham-
education-foundation/)

  * [![](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/Arvind-Sanger-150x150.jpg)](https://pratham.org/2019/05/04/arvind-sanger/)

[Arvind Sanger](https://pratham.org/2019/05/04/arvind-sanger/)

Mr. Sanger founded Geosphere Capital, a global long-short fund manager
investing in natural resources, industrial and Indian equities in 2007.
Between 2002 and 2007, he was a Portfolio Manager at SAC Capital, investing in
a similar fashion. Prior to his tenure at SAC, Mr. Sanger had a 15-year career
as a top-ranked sell-side oil services…[read
more](https://pratham.org/2019/05/04/arvind-sanger/)

  * [![](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/Banmali-150x150.jpg)](https://pratham.org/2020/10/20/banmali-agrawala/)

[Banmali Agrawala](https://pratham.org/2020/10/20/banmali-agrawala/)

Mr. Banmali Agrawala is a veteran in the energy domain. With a diverse and
global experience spanning over three decades, he has spearheaded national and
international organizations. Currently, he is the President, Infrastructure
and Defence & Aerospace at Tata Sons Private Limited.[read
more](https://pratham.org/2020/10/20/banmali-agrawala/)

  * [![](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/Deepak-Raj-150x150.jpg)](https://pratham.org/2019/05/04/deepak-raj/)

[Deepak Raj](https://pratham.org/2019/05/04/deepak-raj/)

Mr. Raj is founder and managing director of the New Jersey-based private
investment firm Raj Associates that has investments in real estate and public
and private securities. He is currently the chairman of Pratham USA. He is
also a CFA and, with his wife Neera, the founder of the Raj Center on Indian
Economic Policies…[read more](https://pratham.org/2019/05/04/deepak-raj/)

  * [![](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/Dinyar-Devitre-150x150.jpg)](https://pratham.org/2019/05/04/dinyar-s-devitre/)

[Dinyar S. Devitre (Vice Chairman, Pratham Education
Foundation)](https://pratham.org/2019/05/04/dinyar-s-devitre/)

Dinyar (Dinny) Devitre is an international business executive who has held
leadership positions over a 45-year period in the consumer products and
financial services industries in Asia, Australia, Japan, Europe, and the U.S.
Mr. Devitre held several senior operating positions with Philip Morris Inc.
and then with Altria Group Inc. where he had a 35-year…[read
more](https://pratham.org/2019/05/04/dinyar-s-devitre/)

  * [![](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/Jalaj-Dani-150x150.jpg)](https://pratham.org/2019/05/04/jalaj-dani/)

[JALAJ DANI](https://pratham.org/2019/05/04/jalaj-dani/)

Mr. Jalaj Dani is currently the Director of Reliance Foundation. He is also
co-promoter of Asian Paints and has spent over two decades in leadership
positions within the organization. Throughout his career, Mr. Dani has worked
extensively in the areas of healthcare, education, rural transformation,
sports, skilling and disaster management. He serves as Independent
Director…[read more](https://pratham.org/2019/05/04/jalaj-dani/)

  * [![](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/51789d94-ee3f-4dc1-9431-bd4f2e988216-150x150.jpg)](https://pratham.org/2019/05/04/dr-madhav-chavan/)

[Madhav Chavan](https://pratham.org/2019/05/04/dr-madhav-chavan/)

After obtaining a PhD in chemistry from Ohio State University and serving on
the faculty at the University of Houston, Dr. Madhav Chavan returned to India
where he worked in the slums of Mumbai as part of the National Literacy
Mission. In 1995, he co-founded Pratham as a result of a UNICEF initiative to
address…[read more](https://pratham.org/2019/05/04/dr-madhav-chavan/)

  * [![](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/Nirmal-Jain-150x150.jpg)](https://pratham.org/2019/05/04/nirmal-jain/)

[Nirmal Jain](https://pratham.org/2019/05/04/nirmal-jain/)

Mr. Jain is the founder of the IIFL Group. He is a first-generation
entrepreneur, who is credited with building one of the largest financial
services groups in India in just about two decades. He holds a post graduate
diploma in management from the Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad. He
is a rank holder Chartered Accountant…[read
more](https://pratham.org/2019/05/04/nirmal-jain/)

  * [![](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/Pramit-Jhaveri-150x150.jpg)](https://pratham.org/2019/05/04/pramit-jhaveri/)

[Pramit Jhaveri](https://pratham.org/2019/05/04/pramit-jhaveri/)

Pramit Jhaveri presently acts as advisor and mentor to start ups, corporates
and family offices. He is Senior Advisor to Premji Invest and PJT Partners and
an Independent Director on the Boards of Bajaj Finance, Bajaj Finserv and
Larsen & Toubro. Prior to his current activities, Pramit was Vice Chairman -
Banking, Asia Pacific Citi. He served as Chief Executive Officer of Citibank
India from 2010…[read more](https://pratham.org/2019/05/04/pramit-jhaveri/)

  * [![](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/Ramesh-150x150.jpg)](https://pratham.org/2019/05/04/ramesh-mangaleswaran/)

[Ramesh Mangaleswaran](https://pratham.org/2019/05/04/ramesh-mangaleswaran/)

Ramesh is a Senior Partner Emeritus at international consulting major McKinsey
& Company, having served for 30 years at the firm, including as founding
partner of McKinsey’s offices in Chennai and Bangalore. He co-led the firm’s
industrials work in India and Asia and led social responsibility initiatives
for Asia. Apart from Pratham Education Foundation, Ramesh is actively
engaged…[read more](https://pratham.org/2019/05/04/ramesh-mangaleswaran/)

  * [![](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/Rukmini_Banerji-Pratham-1-150x150.jpg)](https://pratham.org/2019/05/04/dr-rukmini-banerji/)

[Rukmini Banerji (CEO, Pratham Education
Foundation)](https://pratham.org/2019/05/04/dr-rukmini-banerji/)

Rukmini Banerji is the Chief Executive Officer of Pratham Education
Foundation. She has extensive experience in design and delivery of education
interventions and has played key roles in developing and implementing
Pratham’s partnership programs...[read
more](https://pratham.org/2019/05/04/dr-rukmini-banerji/)

  * [![](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/Sanjay-Nayyar-150x150.jpg)](https://pratham.org/2019/05/04/sanjay-nayar/)

[Sanjay Nayar](https://pratham.org/2019/05/04/sanjay-nayar/)

Sanjay is one of the most well-known and seasoned investors in the Indian
private investing landscape – with over 38 years of experience in the
financial markets. After spending 14 years with KKR India as the CEO, he
served as Senior Advisor to KKR; he has also previously served on the Asian
investment and portfolio…[read more](https://pratham.org/2019/05/04/sanjay-
nayar/)

  * [![](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/sanjiv_malhotra-150x150.jpg)](https://pratham.org/2019/12/25/sanjiv-malhotra/)

[Sanjiv Malhotra](https://pratham.org/2019/12/25/sanjiv-malhotra/)

Sanjiv Malhotra brings a wealth of experience with 45 years in global banking
and financial consulting. His leadership roles span corporate and commercial
banking, risk management, and M&A. He’s been the Chief Risk Officer for
Citigroup South Asia and Citigroup Thailand during the Asian Crisis. He’s also
held significant roles at Bank of America Merrill…[read
more](https://pratham.org/2019/12/25/sanjiv-malhotra/)

  * [![](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/Vibha-Paul-150x150.jpg)](https://pratham.org/2019/05/21/vibha-paul/)

[Vibha Paul Rishi](https://pratham.org/2019/05/21/vibha-paul/)

Ms. Vibha Paul Rishi is an experienced marketing professional with stints in
Indian and international markets, coupled with an abiding passion for people.
Her last role was as the executive director, brand and human capital of Max
India, prior to which she was the director, marketing and customer strategy at
the Future Group. She has…[read more](https://pratham.org/2019/05/21/vibha-
paul/)

  * [![](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/Vijay-Goradia-150x150.jpg)](https://pratham.org/2019/05/04/vijay-goradia/)

[Vijay Goradia](https://pratham.org/2019/05/04/vijay-goradia/)

He is also founder and Chairman of the Vinmar Group and several other
companies. Mr. Goradia is the Founder and Chairman Emeritus of Pratham USA. He
founded Pratham USA in Houston in 1999 after a visit to one of Pratham’s
programs in Mumbai. He serves on the board of Baylor College of Medicine and
MD…[read more](https://pratham.org/2019/05/04/vijay-goradia/)

  * [![](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/Vilas-Gadkari-150x150.jpg)](https://pratham.org/2019/12/25/vilas-gadkari-2/)

[Vilas Gadkari](https://pratham.org/2019/12/25/vilas-gadkari-2/)

Mr. Gadkari is an entrepreneur who invests globally. He currently holds the
Chairmanship of an FMCG company and is on the board of Real Estate and Fin
Tech companies. He is also the non-executive Chairman of Pratham Institute
that focuses on vocational training for underprivileged youth. He received his
B.Tech. in Chemical Engineering from the…[read
more](https://pratham.org/2019/12/25/vilas-gadkari-2/)

[History](https://pratham.org/about/history/)
[Leadership](https://pratham.org/about/leadership/)

  * [Board](https://pratham.org/about/board/)
  * [Leadership](https://pratham.org/about/leadership/)
  * [Partners](https://pratham.org/about/partners/)
  * [Teaching at the Right Level](https://pratham.org/about/teaching-at-the-right-level/)
  * [Recognition](https://pratham.org/about/recognition/)
  * [What’s New](https://pratham.org/about/news/)
  * [Annual Reports](https://pratham.org/about/annual-reports/)
  * [Publications](https://pratham.org/resources/publications/)
  * [Legal & Financial Information](https://pratham.org/about/legal-financial-information/)

###  FEATURED VIDEO

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2AGUWiCjG8o&list=PLB9QKFRqqhbNr--
hJFdRmVxdgWNaQfEow&index=2&t=2s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2AGUWiCjG8o&list=PLB9QKFRqqhbNr
--hJFdRmVxdgWNaQfEow&index=2&t=2s)

About Us

[ About Pratham](https://pratham.org/about/)

[ Board](https://pratham.org/about/board/)

[ Leadership](https://pratham.org/about/leadership/)

[ Partners](https://pratham.org/about/partners/)

Programs

[ Education](https://pratham.org/programs/education/)

[ Vocational Training ]()

[ Annual Status of Education
Report](https://pratham.org/programs/education/aser/)

[ Pratham Council For Vulnerable
Children](https://pratham.org/programs/pratham-council-for-
vulnerablechildren/)

[ Covid Response](https://pratham.org/covid-19-response/)

[ Learning Readiness & Catch
Up](https://pratham.org/covid-19-response/prathams-community-based-campaign-
for-learning-readiness-catch-up/)

[ Lessons from the
Pandemic](https://prathamorg.blob.core.windows.net/data/Pratham%20during%20Pandemic%20Lessons%20from%20the%20community.pdf)

[ ](https://www.facebook.com/PrathamEducationFoundation/ "Pratham on
Facebook") [ ](https://www.linkedin.com/company/pratham "Pratham on Linkedin")
[ ](https://www.youtube.com/user/prathamfoundation "Pratham on Youtube") [
](https://instagram.com/prathameducation "Pratham on Instagram") [
](https://twitter.com/Pratham_India "Twitter")

Get Involved

[ Job Opportunities](https://pratham.org/get-involved/job-opportunities/)

[ Internships](https://pratham.org/get-involved/internships/)

Delhi Office

B- 4/59, Safdarjung Enclave  
1st Floor, New Delhi - 110 029  
Email: [info@pratham.org](mailto:info@pratham.org)  
Contact number: 01141651638

Mumbai Office

Y.B. Chavan Center, 4th Floor,  
Gen. J. Bhosale Marg. Nariman Point  
Mumbai, Maharashtra - 400021  
Email: [info@pratham.org](mailto:info@pratham.org)  
Contact number: 022 22819561  
022 22819562

__

[ ](https://www.facebook.com/PrathamEducationFoundation/ "Pratham on
Facebook") [ ](https://www.linkedin.com/company/pratham "Pratham on Linkedin")
[ ](https://www.youtube.com/user/prathamfoundation "Pratham on Youtube") [
](https://instagram.com/prathameducation "Pratham on Instagram") [
](https://twitter.com/Pratham_India "Pratham on X Twitter")

