Skip to content

__[![Pratham](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/pratham-
logo.svg)](https://pratham.org/)

  * [About Us](https://pratham.org/about/)
    * [Board](https://pratham.org/about/board/)
    * [Leadership](https://pratham.org/about/leadership/)
    * [Partners](https://pratham.org/about/partners/)
    * [Teaching at the Right Level](https://pratham.org/about/teaching-at-the-right-level/)
    * [Recognition](https://pratham.org/about/recognition/)
    * [What’s New](https://pratham.org/about/news/)
    * [Legal & Financial Information](https://pratham.org/about/legal-financial-information/)
  * Programs
    * [Education](https://pratham.org/programs/education/)
      * [Hamara Gaon](https://pratham.org/about/hamara-gaon/)
      * [Early Childhood Education](https://pratham.org/programs/education/early-childhood-education/)
      * [Elementary](https://pratham.org/programs/education/elementary/)
      * [Second Chance](https://pratham.org/slider/second-chance-slider/)
      * [Digital Initiatives](https://pratham.org/programs/education/digital-initiatives/)
    * [Vocational Training](https://pratham.org/programs/education/vocational-training/)
    * [Pratham Council For Vulnerable Children](https://pratham.org/programs/pratham-council-for-vulnerablechildren/)
    * [Annual Status of Education Report](https://pratham.org/programs/education/aser/)
  * Get Involved
    * [Job Opportunities](https://pratham.org/get-involved/job-opportunities/)
    * [Internships](https://pratham.org/get-involved/internships/)
  * Resources
    * [Pratham Digital](https://prathamopenschool.org/)
    * [Stories of Change](https://pratham.org/impact/)
    * [Blogs](https://pratham.org/blogs/)
    * Campaigns
      * [IAmPratham](https://pratham.org/iampratham/)
      * [Daan utsav](https://pratham.org/daan-utsav-2/)
      * [CAMaL Ka Camp](https://pratham.org/camal-ka-camp-2023/)
    * [Publications](https://pratham.org/resources/publications/)
    * [Annual Reports](https://pratham.org/about/annual-reports/)
  * [Contact](https://pratham.org/contact/)

[Donate](https://www.pratham.org/get-involved/donate)

# COVID-19 Response

###  Overview

Over the past 25 years, Pratham has worked at scale across India to address
the education crisis facing the nation’s children and youth. Today, as we
confront an unprecedented challenge, we are leveraging our experience and
agility to navigate the pandemic and fulfill our mission.

  * Keeping people safe and informed
  * Connecting with children and communities in a new way
  * Partnering with governments to support learning
  * Making resources available to all
  * Responding to the crisis through targeted initiatives

[![](https://www.pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/03/note-
landscape-02-1024x674.jpg)](https://prathamorg.blob.core.windows.net/data/Pratham%20during%20Pandemic%20Lessons%20from%20the%20community.pdf)

How COVID-19 changed the Pratham approach of “teaching” children to “reaching”
families to ensure the continuing education of children during the pandemic-
induced school closures. What the pandemic taught us about having an agile and
flexible approach in our methodologies which would empower us to deal with
lockdown restrictions and COVID outbreaks.

[ ![](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/07/1156X868-1024x769.jpg)
](https://pratham.org/covid-19-response/prathams-community-based-campaign-for-
learning-readiness-catch-up/)

## [Learning Readiness & Catch
Up](https://pratham.org/covid-19-response/prathams-community-based-campaign-
for-learning-readiness-catch-up/)

A community-based campaign carried out by Pratham in response to the school
closure caused by COVID-19. The aim of the campaign was to encourage parents,
family members and others in the community to engage with children via fun
activities and help them learn.

[ Read More ](https://pratham.org/covid-19-response/prathams-community-based-
campaign-for-learning-readiness-catch-up/ )

[ ![](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/Connecting-with-children-
image-1024x769.jpg) ](https://pratham.org/covid-19-response/connecting-with-
children-learn-and-fun/)

## [Connecting with children – learn and
fun!](https://pratham.org/covid-19-response/connecting-with-children-learn-
and-fun/)

The number of children, youth and adults not attending schools or educational
institutions because of COVID-19 has spiked globally. In India alone, an
estimated 300 million learners across all age groups are out of school right
now.

[ Read More ](https://pratham.org/covid-19-response/connecting-with-children-
learn-and-fun/ )

[ ![](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/Digital-resources-
image.jpg) ](https://pratham.org/covid-19-response/digital-resources-enabling-
learning-for-all/)

## [Digital resources - enabling learning for
all](https://pratham.org/covid-19-response/digital-resources-enabling-
learning-for-all/)

In the last twenty five years, Pratham has worked on scale with children
across the country on a range of educational interventions and in a variety of
learning contexts. In these difficult times, Pratham is working to provide
children across the country access to engaging learning content.

[ Read More ](https://pratham.org/covid-19-response/digital-resources-
enabling-learning-for-all/ )

[ ![](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/Government-partnership-
page-image-1-1024x769.jpeg)
](https://pratham.org/covid-19-response/government-partnerships-together-we-
are-stronger/)

## [Government partnerships – Together, we are
stronger](https://pratham.org/covid-19-response/government-partnerships-
together-we-are-stronger/)

The lockdown in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic has led to school closure
across the country. While children are not physically attending school, many
state government education departments have been proactive in developing
technology solutions to engage children and teachers through online platforms.

[ Read More ](https://pratham.org/covid-19-response/government-partnerships-
together-we-are-stronger/ )

[ ![](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/Crisis-management-
image-1.jpeg) ](https://pratham.org/covid-19-response/crisis-management-
initiatives-resources/)

## [Crisis management – Initiatives &
Resources](https://pratham.org/covid-19-response/crisis-management-
initiatives-resources/)

With teams spread across the country, we have taken up initiatives and
activities to support relief and safety measures in light of the COVID-19
pandemic. Through our Mumbai Food Project initiative, we are providing support
those most in need.

[ Read More ](https://pratham.org/covid-19-response/crisis-management-
initiatives-resources/ )

###  Glimpses

[![](https://www.pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/Glimpses-
Images-01-1024x585.jpg) ]()

### **Acing the numbers game!**

[![](https://www.pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/Glimpses-
Images-02-1024x585.jpg)]()

### **Let’s do a vocab recap!**

[![](https://www.pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/Glimpses-
Images-03-1024x585.jpg)]()

### **The Lion & the mouse**

[![](https://www.pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/Glimpses-
Images-04-1024x585.jpg)]()

### **Chaitanya – plumbing for good!**

![](https://www.pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/Glimpses-
Images-05-1024x585.jpg)

### **Jyoti – the Corona Warrior**

[![](https://www.pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/Facial-
Expressions.jpg)]()

### **Facial Expression**

![](https://www.pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/Tring-Tring-
Telephone.jpg)

### **Tring Tring Telephone**

![](https://www.pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/A-rhyme-by-little-
learners.jpg)

### **A rhyme by little learners in Himachal Pradesh**

![](https://www.pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/Word-Antakshari.jpg)

### **Word Antakshari**

![](https://www.pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/Shale-Baherchi-
Shala.jpg)

### **Shale Baherchi Shala - an initiative of the Government of Maharashtra &
Pratham**

[![](https://www.pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/Anjali-Shyam.jpg)]()

### **Anjali Rao & Shyam Bai Bhatt**

![](https://www.pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/Gokul-Sagar.jpg)

### **Gokul & Sagar**

![](https://www.pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/Jyoti-Sarde.jpg)

### **Jyoti Sarde**

![](https://www.pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/Conference-call.jpg)

### **Conference Call**

About Us

[ About Pratham](https://pratham.org/about/)

[ Board](https://pratham.org/about/board/)

[ Leadership](https://pratham.org/about/leadership/)

[ Partners](https://pratham.org/about/partners/)

Programs

[ Education](https://pratham.org/programs/education/)

[ Vocational Training ]()

[ Annual Status of Education
Report](https://pratham.org/programs/education/aser/)

[ Pratham Council For Vulnerable
Children](https://pratham.org/programs/pratham-council-for-
vulnerablechildren/)

[ Covid Response](https://pratham.org/covid-19-response/)

[ Learning Readiness & Catch
Up](https://pratham.org/covid-19-response/prathams-community-based-campaign-
for-learning-readiness-catch-up/)

[ Lessons from the
Pandemic](https://prathamorg.blob.core.windows.net/data/Pratham%20during%20Pandemic%20Lessons%20from%20the%20community.pdf)

[ ](https://www.facebook.com/PrathamEducationFoundation/ "Pratham on
Facebook") [ ](https://www.linkedin.com/company/pratham "Pratham on Linkedin")
[ ](https://www.youtube.com/user/prathamfoundation "Pratham on Youtube") [
](https://instagram.com/prathameducation "Pratham on Instagram") [
](https://twitter.com/Pratham_India "Twitter")

Get Involved

[ Job Opportunities](https://pratham.org/get-involved/job-opportunities/)

[ Internships](https://pratham.org/get-involved/internships/)

Delhi Office

B- 4/59, Safdarjung Enclave  
1st Floor, New Delhi - 110 029  
Email: [info@pratham.org](mailto:info@pratham.org)  
Contact number: 01141651638

Mumbai Office

Y.B. Chavan Center, 4th Floor,  
Gen. J. Bhosale Marg. Nariman Point  
Mumbai, Maharashtra - 400021  
Email: [info@pratham.org](mailto:info@pratham.org)  
Contact number: 022 22819561  
022 22819562

__

[ ](https://www.facebook.com/PrathamEducationFoundation/ "Pratham on
Facebook") [ ](https://www.linkedin.com/company/pratham "Pratham on Linkedin")
[ ](https://www.youtube.com/user/prathamfoundation "Pratham on Youtube") [
](https://instagram.com/prathameducation "Pratham on Instagram") [
](https://twitter.com/Pratham_India "Pratham on X Twitter")

## **Jyoti Sarde**

![](https://www.pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/Jyoti-Sarde.jpg)  
Krushnali Sarde, studying in second grade, is seen listening to the radio app
on her family cellphone, along with her mother, Jyoti Sarde. The Sarde family
practices agriculture and hail from Hiwara Korde village, in Maharashtra's
Akola district. Both Jyoti and her husband spend their day working on the
field, but there is hardly any activity after the national lockdown. However,
it has allowed Jyoti to spend some time with Krushnali, and the 'Shale
Baherchi Shala' (School, outside a school) correctly serves the purpose!
Swati, our CRL clicked this photo, and she then sent it to the state Whatsapp
group.

## **Conference Call**

![](https://www.pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/Conference-call.jpg)  
Taruna (Grade 1), Tijesh and Abhay (Grade 3) created their own telephone after
watching a Whatsapp video titled 'Tring Tring Telephone'.The video was shared
with them as part of Pratham's Karona, Thodi Masti, Thodi Padhai initiative.
The trio lives in the Bunagaon village of Kondagaon district in Chhattisgarh.
The village is in a dense forest and comes under the larger region of Bastar
inhabited by several tribal populations. Despite being in remote areas with
limited connectivity, children continue to learn. This picture captures the
wonderful moment where these children not only created something themselves
but also were amused by their own creation. And the cherry on top: Even the
dense forest cant disturb the connectivity and voice quality of their own
conference call!

## **Gokul & Sagar**

![](https://www.pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/Gokul-Sagar.jpg)  
Gokul (6th grade, on the left) and Sagar (1st grade) are from Sugaturu
Village, Devanahalli Block, Bengaluru Rural District. Both of them stay in the
same neighbourhood in the village. Devanahalli is a Hybrid Hamara Gaon
village, and Gokul is an active participant in the H-learning activities. He
stays with his grandmother, and his parents have migrated to work to
Sidlaghatta, a nearby town. Sagar's parents are farmers. We have reached them
through a volunteer named Murali, who is also from this village. Our CRL is in
touch with Murali through WhatsApp. Gokul also follows our science videos on
the PraDigi App and makes science models by watching them. However, this
experiment is not in the App, and our CRL showed it during a science event in
the village. Due to the lockdown, children are not able to meet regularly and
play with each other. But these two meet daily for a couple of hours and keep
themselves engaged through these activities. #PrathamMoments

## **Shale Baherchi Shala - an initiative of the Government of Maharashtra &
Pratham**

## **Anjali Rao & Shyam Bai Bhatt**

![](https://www.pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/Anjali-Shyam.jpg)  
Anjali Rao listens to a story narrated by her grandmother Shyam Bai Bhatt as
both of them follow the 'story activity' sent by us through an SMS. Anjali is
in the fifth grade, and her parents are daily wage labourers. The photo,
clicked by our volunteer, is from M.K Bahara village in Chhattisgarh's
Mahasamund district. This is a 'Hamara Gaon' village, and grandmothers here
have been narrating stories to children as part of our program for the past
two years.

## **Word Antakshari**

## **A rhyme by little learners in Himachal Pradesh**

## **Tring Tring Telephone**

## **Chaitanya – plumbing for good**

![](https://www.pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/Video-
Images-11-1024x585.jpg)

According to the WHO, the two most important preventive measures against
COVID-19 are handwashing and social distancing. Wanting to keep his community
safe, Chaitanya set out to create an invention that would allow multiple users
to wash their hands at the same while maintaining the required distance
between them. The enterprising youth learned his trade at Pratham’s plumbing
program. Chaitanya’s invention, which he has dedicated to his grandmother, now
stands at the main entrance of his village in Alibaug, where members of his
community use it happily—and frequently.

## **Facial Expression**

## **The Lion & the mouse**

![](https://www.pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/Glimpses-
Images-03-1024x585.jpg)

Nabanita Das, a resident of Pachim Baligaon village in Assam's Nagaon
district, proudly displays the 'Lion and the Mouse' story written by her in
her own words! This story-making activity was sent through an SMS, as part of
Pratham's 'Karona, Thodi Masti, Thodi Padhai' initiative. A witness to this
activity, Nabanita's mother clicked this photo and sent it to us.

## **Acing the numbers game!**

![](https://www.pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/Glimpses-
Images-01-1024x585.jpg)

Look at little learners across the country making the most of being at home.
We sent them an engaging activity through an SMS in 10 languages. The activity
is part of an ongoing series of messages under our initiative - Karona, Thodi
Masti, Thodi Padhai - through which we share fun-filled learning activities
with children in 20 states. Here, you can see them learn addition and strategy
while having loads of fun!

## **Jyoti – the Corona Warrior**

![](https://www.pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/Glimpses-
Images-05-1024x585.jpg)

This goes to all the spirited frontline Corona Warriors like Jyoti, an alumnus
of the Pratham Healthcare program. In her capacity as a General Duty Assistant
has taken care of several COVID-19 affected patients. When asked what keeps
her going in such a fearful scenario, she says, “One can always choose to run
away, but what if our near and dear ones suffer from this? Will we run away
even then?” On her part, Jyoti very humbly requests everyone to stay at home
which will help her and other Frontline warriors, who have left their families
at home, to fight and win a definitive battle against the Corona pandemic.

## **Let’s do a vocab recap!**

![](https://www.pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/Glimpses-
Images-02-1024x585.jpg)

How many words can you make from the letter you pick? We asked children this
question through an SMS in 10 languages across 20 states. Here is a glimpse of
how they responded to this fun activity which was shared as part of 'Karona -
Thodi Masti, Thodi Padhai', our Remote Learning initiative.

