Skip to content

__[![Pratham](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/pratham-
logo.svg)](https://pratham.org/)

  * [About Us](https://pratham.org/about/)
    * [Board](https://pratham.org/about/board/)
    * [Leadership](https://pratham.org/about/leadership/)
    * [Partners](https://pratham.org/about/partners/)
    * [Teaching at the Right Level](https://pratham.org/about/teaching-at-the-right-level/)
    * [Recognition](https://pratham.org/about/recognition/)
    * [What’s New](https://pratham.org/about/news/)
    * [Legal & Financial Information](https://pratham.org/about/legal-financial-information/)
  * Programs
    * [Education](https://pratham.org/programs/education/)
      * [Hamara Gaon](https://pratham.org/about/hamara-gaon/)
      * [Early Childhood Education](https://pratham.org/programs/education/early-childhood-education/)
      * [Elementary](https://pratham.org/programs/education/elementary/)
      * [Second Chance](https://pratham.org/slider/second-chance-slider/)
      * [Digital Initiatives](https://pratham.org/programs/education/digital-initiatives/)
    * [Vocational Training](https://pratham.org/programs/education/vocational-training/)
    * [Pratham Council For Vulnerable Children](https://pratham.org/programs/pratham-council-for-vulnerablechildren/)
    * [Annual Status of Education Report](https://pratham.org/programs/education/aser/)
  * Get Involved
    * [Job Opportunities](https://pratham.org/get-involved/job-opportunities/)
    * [Internships](https://pratham.org/get-involved/internships/)
  * Resources
    * [Pratham Digital](https://prathamopenschool.org/)
    * [Stories of Change](https://pratham.org/impact/)
    * [Blogs](https://pratham.org/blogs/)
    * Campaigns
      * [IAmPratham](https://pratham.org/iampratham/)
      * [Daan utsav](https://pratham.org/daan-utsav-2/)
      * [CAMaL Ka Camp](https://pratham.org/camal-ka-camp-2023/)
    * [Publications](https://pratham.org/resources/publications/)
    * [Annual Reports](https://pratham.org/about/annual-reports/)
  * [Contact](https://pratham.org/contact/)

[Donate](https://www.pratham.org/get-involved/donate)

# Digital Initiatives

###  INTRODUCTION

The Hybrid learning program involves getting children in the age group 10-14
in a village to form their own groups of 5-6 each, thus enabling them to co-
create a learning space within their community. Digital devices and content
placed directly in the hands of children providing them with opportunities and
choices to learn on their own. Community based children’s groups engage in
choice-based learning and are guided by the coaches and youth members in the
communities. The communities are organized to facilitate and support the
learning activities and assessments.

The program aims to create an open learning mechanism enabling children and
youth to prepare for school, work, and life. The program has been designed on
the premise that children can be motivated to learn on their own. Children
learn on tablets and do projects or conduct activities (e.g. role plays,
playing games) and then present what they have learned either in front of a
live audience of parents or on a video.

Our internal assessments _(an RCT conducted in Dausa, Rajasthan)_ indicate
that children in treatment groups perform about 12 percentage points better
than the control groups in school curricular subjects, although they are not
taught and there is no age-grade curriculum mapped to textbooks created. There
are three factors that likely affect the outcome:

  * Group Learning
  * Simplified and Interactive Content
  * A general increase in motivation to learn which counters the negative response to the boredom of the classroom. (over the last two years the average monthly use of tablets by groups is 13 days/month for about an hour every day although there is no “class” held and no one tells them to sit and study.)

###  PraDigi - 'Pratham Digital'

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-BQegwLRvls&t=4s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-BQegwLRvls&t=4s)

###  Approach

Pratham believes that it takes a village and technology to educate a child.
Therefore, Pratham has identified three pillars for the implementation of the
H Learning program - Social Structure, Digital Infrastructure and Teaching
Learning Methodology.

##### _social structure_

Pratham works with the village/urban community to create an environment of
learning for children. This is done by interacting with different stakeholders
of the community, raising awareness on the education scenario in their
community and creating ownership amongst them for the learning interventions.

##### _Digital Infrastructure_

The technology aspect of the project involves providing the community access
to different digital devices to enhance creation of open learning spaces. This
is implemented to motivate the volunteers to facilitate the children’s groups
while ensuring the continuation of their own education and learning.

##### _Learning Content_

Pratham strives to make content engaging and interesting for learners. It
works across three domains of learning – preparation for school, work and
life. With the focus on creating contextualized content, the program
curatesvideos and games into interesting packages – “courses”. Making learning
a choice- driven process. Task based games are being introduced to enable
computational thinking among learners.

Building on the know-how, success and reach of our education programs, the
digital content endeavours to be an additional input in the overall
development of children. Additionally, Pratham collaborates with numerous NGO
Partners and platforms, to curate, develop and co-create learning resources
for the non-traditional curriculum.

###  Context

Pratham started its digital intervention with the Hybrid learning program in
the year 2015. Today, the H-learning program is a community driven, digitally
aided intervention running in approximately **1000 communities of Maharashtra,
Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh reaching out to over 60,000 students with 6,000
tablets.** In 2019, the program has been initiated in urban communities of
Pune, Bangalore, Delhi and Mumbai.

Subsequently, the digital resources and tablets were made available in
Pratham’s foundational programs, Vocational Programs and in the Early
Childhood Education programs on an experimental basis. Today, digital hardware
and software is available **across 21 states reaching 300,000 learners through
18,000 tablets across India.** These resources created for different age
groups are available on the Pratham Open School YouTube Channel and as
learning applications on the Google Playstore.The support of donors and
partners has not only led to the expansion of Pratham’s digital programs but
also enabled the formation of core content groups within Pratham, producing
**over 2500 videos and 300 learning games across 11 regional languages.**

The 1000 communities of the Hybrid Learning Program continue to be
‘demonstration sites’ where new ideas are implemented, and new resources are
experimented with. The program has evolved to enable the learner to make
choices from an array of ‘courses’ available across domains and areas of
interests. It has also empowered the community by engaging stakeholders and
creating a cadre of village level facilitators or ‘coaches’ to support the
learning ecosystem in the community.

###  Measurement

Pratham in its digital intervention measures the involvement and motivation of
students through their interaction with the device and their engagement with
the content resources. This helps us understand students’ choice, viewing
behaviour and interests.

###  Contact

[digital@pratham.org](mailto:digital@pratham.org)

###  DOCUMENTS

[Beyond Elementary](https://pratham.org/programs/education/beyond-elementary/)
[Vocational Training](https://pratham.org/programs/vocational-training/)

  * [Education](https://pratham.org/programs/education/)
    * [Hamara Gaon](https://pratham.org/about/hamara-gaon/)
    * [Early Childhood Education](https://pratham.org/programs/education/early-childhood-education/)
    * [Elementary](https://pratham.org/programs/education/elementary/)
    * [Second Chance](https://pratham.org/slider/second-chance-slider/)
    * [Digital Initiatives](https://pratham.org/programs/education/digital-initiatives/)
  * [Vocational Training](https://pratham.org/programs/education/early-childhood-education-new/)
  * [Annual Status of Education Report](https://pratham.org/programs/education/aser/)

Facebook

Twitter

    
    
    [custom-facebook-feed layout=full type=photos num=5 height=200px]

[custom-twitter-feeds height=200px]

###  GET INVOLVED

[ ![Partner with us](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/contact-
partner.png) ]()

[ Partner with us]()

[ ![Donate](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/donate-icons.png)
]()

[ Donate]()

[ ![Job Opportunities](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/work-
with-us.png) ](https://pratham.org/get-involved/job-opportunities/)

[ Job Opportunities](https://pratham.org/get-involved/job-opportunities/)

[ ![Internships](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/get-
involved.png) ](https://pratham.org/get-involved/internships/)

[ Internships](https://pratham.org/get-involved/internships/)

About Us

[ About Pratham](https://pratham.org/about/)

[ Board](https://pratham.org/about/board/)

[ Leadership](https://pratham.org/about/leadership/)

[ Partners](https://pratham.org/about/partners/)

Programs

[ Education](https://pratham.org/programs/education/)

[ Vocational Training ]()

[ Annual Status of Education
Report](https://pratham.org/programs/education/aser/)

[ Pratham Council For Vulnerable
Children](https://pratham.org/programs/pratham-council-for-
vulnerablechildren/)

[ Covid Response](https://pratham.org/covid-19-response/)

[ Learning Readiness & Catch
Up](https://pratham.org/covid-19-response/prathams-community-based-campaign-
for-learning-readiness-catch-up/)

[ Lessons from the
Pandemic](https://prathamorg.blob.core.windows.net/data/Pratham%20during%20Pandemic%20Lessons%20from%20the%20community.pdf)

[ ](https://www.facebook.com/PrathamEducationFoundation/ "Pratham on
Facebook") [ ](https://www.linkedin.com/company/pratham "Pratham on Linkedin")
[ ](https://www.youtube.com/user/prathamfoundation "Pratham on Youtube") [
](https://instagram.com/prathameducation "Pratham on Instagram") [
](https://twitter.com/Pratham_India "Twitter")

Get Involved

[ Job Opportunities](https://pratham.org/get-involved/job-opportunities/)

[ Internships](https://pratham.org/get-involved/internships/)

Delhi Office

B- 4/59, Safdarjung Enclave  
1st Floor, New Delhi - 110 029  
Email: [info@pratham.org](mailto:info@pratham.org)  
Contact number: 01141651638

Mumbai Office

Y.B. Chavan Center, 4th Floor,  
Gen. J. Bhosale Marg. Nariman Point  
Mumbai, Maharashtra - 400021  
Email: [info@pratham.org](mailto:info@pratham.org)  
Contact number: 022 22819561  
022 22819562

__

[ ](https://www.facebook.com/PrathamEducationFoundation/ "Pratham on
Facebook") [ ](https://www.linkedin.com/company/pratham "Pratham on Linkedin")
[ ](https://www.youtube.com/user/prathamfoundation "Pratham on Youtube") [
](https://instagram.com/prathameducation "Pratham on Instagram") [
](https://twitter.com/Pratham_India "Pratham on X Twitter")

