Skip to content

__[![Pratham](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/pratham-
logo.svg)](https://pratham.org/)

  * [About Us](https://pratham.org/about/)
    * [Board](https://pratham.org/about/board/)
    * [Leadership](https://pratham.org/about/leadership/)
    * [Partners](https://pratham.org/about/partners/)
    * [Teaching at the Right Level](https://pratham.org/about/teaching-at-the-right-level/)
    * [Recognition](https://pratham.org/about/recognition/)
    * [What’s New](https://pratham.org/about/news/)
    * [Legal & Financial Information](https://pratham.org/about/legal-financial-information/)
  * Programs
    * [Education](https://pratham.org/programs/education/)
      * [Hamara Gaon](https://pratham.org/about/hamara-gaon/)
      * [Early Childhood Education](https://pratham.org/programs/education/early-childhood-education/)
      * [Elementary](https://pratham.org/programs/education/elementary/)
      * [Second Chance](https://pratham.org/slider/second-chance-slider/)
      * [Digital Initiatives](https://pratham.org/programs/education/digital-initiatives/)
    * [Vocational Training](https://pratham.org/programs/education/vocational-training/)
    * [Pratham Council For Vulnerable Children](https://pratham.org/programs/pratham-council-for-vulnerablechildren/)
    * [Annual Status of Education Report](https://pratham.org/programs/education/aser/)
  * Get Involved
    * [Job Opportunities](https://pratham.org/get-involved/job-opportunities/)
    * [Internships](https://pratham.org/get-involved/internships/)
  * Resources
    * [Pratham Digital](https://prathamopenschool.org/)
    * [Stories of Change](https://pratham.org/impact/)
    * [Blogs](https://pratham.org/blogs/)
    * Campaigns
      * [IAmPratham](https://pratham.org/iampratham/)
      * [Daan utsav](https://pratham.org/daan-utsav-2/)
      * [CAMaL Ka Camp](https://pratham.org/camal-ka-camp-2023/)
    * [Publications](https://pratham.org/resources/publications/)
    * [Annual Reports](https://pratham.org/about/annual-reports/)
  * [Contact](https://pratham.org/contact/)

[Donate](https://www.pratham.org/get-involved/donate)

# Early Childhood Education

Our Early Childhood Education program focuses on the holistic development of
children aged 3 to 8 years

###  INTRODUCTION

The focus of Pratham’s Early Childhood Education program is holistic
development of children and their readiness for school in the age group of 3-8
years. This is done with the support of mothers, school teachers and
volunteers in the community.

Holistic development and school readiness include four large developmental
domains:

**Physical Development**

Develop fine and gross motor skills, along with pre-writing abilities and
ensure appropriate growth and health

**Socio-Emotional Development**

Learn to adapt to new settings & people, work in groups, individual,
interaction & interpersonal skills

**Cognitive Development**

Develop basic problem-solving abilities, along with knowledge of colours,
shape, symbols etc that are essential for pre-math

**Language Development**

Develop basic vocabulary and improve the ability to express ideas confidently,
both individually and in groups



###  FEATURED VIDEOS

###  Context

Early Childhood is a period where brain development is at its peak. Fostering
appropriate developmental abilities of children at this crucial stage has been
closely associated with improved outcomes, such as better preparedness for
school, enhanced retention and all round development of the child.

There is clearly a need to look at the 3 to 8 year old age group in India very
closely.The Annual Status of Education Report [(ASER 2018) on ‘Young
Children’](http://img.asercentre.org/docs/ASER%202019/aser%202018%20young%20children/aser2018youngchildren.pdf)
shows that across India, 28.8% of children at age 3 do not attend any
government or private preschool. This report also shows a wide variation in
enrollment patterns across states. While the National Education Policy 2020
has laid out that the appropriate age for a child to enter grade 1 is 6 years
of age, a significant number of children in government schools are age 5 or
below. The data also indicated that children who enter school before the
appropriate age of 6 do comparatively worse than their older counterparts in
the same grade.



###  Key Elements

Some distinguishing elements of Pratham’s approach towards Early Childhood
Education are:

Local Resources | Contextual content & low-cost material | Regular Assessment | Mother Engagement  
---|---|---|---  
  
This instructor or teacher is a local community member, who has a strong
understanding of the local context, which helps her effectively interact with
children and engage with parents.

The content is based on the child’s immediate surroundings. Activities are
conducted with children in varying setups – big groups, small groups and
individually – and are supported with contextualized print and play material
such as flash cards, story books, story cards, picture cards, beads, clay and
locally available objects of daily use.

Children are regularly assessed by instructors through simple activities and
observations. Indicators for assessment are such that they are easy to
observe, measure and communicate. The findings of these periodic assessments
help instructors track children’s progress and are regularly communicated to
parents as an engagement tool.

Mothers are also engaged through periodic meetings, creation of mothers’
groups in the community and individual home visits. Mother engagement includes
discussions, games and material creation and distribution.

###  Delivery Models

Pratham’s work in Early Childhood Education began over 25 years ago with
community-based preschool centres in Mumbai, which were run by local young
women. Over the years, the program has evolved to include multiple delivery
models to suit the dynamic contexts and needs of different geographies across
India. Today, Pratham’s ECE program is implemented in the following ways:

**DIRECT APPROACH:**

Anganwadi Support: This involves mobilization of community volunteers to
provide daily instructional activities to children in anganwadis, form and
work with mothers’ groups and conduct community events. Pratham provides
training and on-site monitoring support to volunteers. Pratham’s anganwadi
support model follows a ‘teaching in, reaching out’ approach where efforts are
made to engage children both within the institution (i.e. anganwadis) as well
as outside it – at home and in the community.

Pratham partners with ICDS and provides support to anganwadi workers across
the block. Pratham provides content, material, and demonstrates appropriate
teaching practices and supports anganwadi workers in carrying out learning
activities with children.

Outside the anganwadi, Pratham engages mothers in the community and encourages
them to participate in their child’s learning process. This is done by forming
mothers’ groups in every community and facilitating regular meetings where
Pratham staff and community volunteers demonstrate learning activities for
them to conduct with their children at home and discuss any issues related to
their children’s education.

Pratham also conducts school readiness melas in every community before the
start of each school year for children about to enter grade 1. This mela
encourages a mother and child to come together to participate in the learning
focused activities.

See school readiness melas in action in
[Rajasthan](https://styouthnet.blob.core.windows.net/pratham-
attachments/School readiness mela RJ visual PPT.pdf) and
[Assam](https://styouthnet.blob.core.windows.net/pratham-attachments/School
readiness mela PPT -Assam.pptx.pdf).

**GOVERNMENT PARTNERSHIP APPROACH:**

In formal government partnerships, Pratham partners with the state/district-
level government to strengthen existing government infrastructure and
resources for the quality provision of Early Childhood Education, either in
Anganwadi centres or in pre-primary classes and early grades within government
schools. Pratham and the government jointly work towards the development of
the program, including designing curriculum and material, training government
personnel and supporting other key elements such as on-site monitoring and
mentoring, measurement and assessment and periodic reviews. Pratham views
these government partnerships as a key pathway to achieving systemic change.

###  Measurement

Pratham has an observation- and activity-based approach to measuring
children’s progress under the Early Childhood Education program. Assessment
under the program is done in two ways:

Teacher-Led Assessment | Sample Based Assessment  
---|---  
Periodic observation-based assessments by the Anganwadi worker/Pratham instructor/school teacher to help understand how each child is doing and track progress over the course of the year. This information is communicated to parents via a Child Report Card with easy-to-understand grading indicators. Pratham uses this as an effective engagement tool for parents. | Baseline and endline assessments of randomly sampled children from intervention and control units conducted by external Pratham observers. Oral, written and observed data is collected on a variety of activities conducted individually and in small and large groups. Used to understand the impact of Pratham interventions on preschool children enrolled in Balwadis/Anganwadis as compared to children in the same areas who are not part of Pratham interventions. Data is collected and can be used for analysis to understand overall status of learning gains through Pratham programs.  
  
This instructor or teacher is a local community member, who has a strong
understanding of the local context, which helps her effectively interact with
children and engage with parents.

The content is based on the child’s immediate surroundings. Activities are
conducted with children in varying setups – big groups, small groups and
individually – and are supported with contextualized print and play material
such as flash cards, story books, story cards, picture cards, beads, clay and
locally available objects of daily use.

Children are regularly assessed by instructors through simple activities and
observations. Indicators for assessment are such that they are easy to
observe, measure and communicate. The findings of these periodic assessments
help instructors track children’s progress and are regularly communicated to
parents as an engagement tool.

Mothers are also engaged through periodic meetings, creation of mothers’
groups in the community and individual home visits. Mother engagement includes
discussions, games and material creation and distribution.

###  Reach and Scale

Pratham reaches about 492,000 children through its various ECE programs
(around 92,000 through direct programs and an estimated 400,000 through
government partnerships). Pratham also facilitated the creation of about
37,000 mothers’ groups.

Pratham’s ECE program is currently active, through either the demonstrations
or anganwadi support, in Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Andhra
Pradesh, Telangana, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan, Maharashtra, West
Bengal, Delhi, Gujarat, Bihar and Odisha.

Pratham is in state government partnerships for Early Childhood Education in
Punjab, Himachal Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh and Haryana.

###  Contact

[ece@pratham.org](mailto:ece@pratham.org)

###  DOCUMENTS

Child Report Card –[Click here to
read](https://styouthnet.blob.core.windows.net/pratham-attachments/Readiness
Mela_Report Card 02 Dec \(3\).pdf)

Early Years Research and Evaluation Summary Note – [Click here to
read](https://styouthnet.blob.core.windows.net/pratham-attachments/research
and evaluation studies.pptx.pdf)

[Elementary](https://www.pratham.org/programs/education/elementary/)

  * [Education](https://pratham.org/programs/education/)
    * [Hamara Gaon](https://pratham.org/about/hamara-gaon/)
    * [Early Childhood Education](https://pratham.org/programs/education/early-childhood-education/)
    * [Elementary](https://pratham.org/programs/education/elementary/)
    * [Second Chance](https://pratham.org/slider/second-chance-slider/)
    * [Digital Initiatives](https://pratham.org/programs/education/digital-initiatives/)
  * [Vocational Training](https://pratham.org/programs/education/early-childhood-education-new/)
  * [Annual Status of Education Report](https://pratham.org/programs/education/aser/)

Facebook

Twitter

    
    
    [custom-facebook-feed layout=full type=photos num=5 height=200px]

[custom-twitter-feeds height=200px]

###  GET INVOLVED

[ ![Partner with us](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/contact-
partner.png) ]()

[ Partner with us]()

[ ![Donate](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/donate-icons.png)
]()

[ Donate]()

[ ![Job Opportunities](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/work-
with-us.png) ](https://pratham.org/get-involved/job-opportunities/)

[ Job Opportunities](https://pratham.org/get-involved/job-opportunities/)

[ ![Internships](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/get-
involved.png) ](https://pratham.org/get-involved/internships/)

[ Internships](https://pratham.org/get-involved/internships/)

About Us

[ About Pratham](https://pratham.org/about/)

[ Board](https://pratham.org/about/board/)

[ Leadership](https://pratham.org/about/leadership/)

[ Partners](https://pratham.org/about/partners/)

Programs

[ Education](https://pratham.org/programs/education/)

[ Vocational Training ]()

[ Annual Status of Education
Report](https://pratham.org/programs/education/aser/)

[ Pratham Council For Vulnerable
Children](https://pratham.org/programs/pratham-council-for-
vulnerablechildren/)

[ Covid Response](https://pratham.org/covid-19-response/)

[ Learning Readiness & Catch
Up](https://pratham.org/covid-19-response/prathams-community-based-campaign-
for-learning-readiness-catch-up/)

[ Lessons from the
Pandemic](https://prathamorg.blob.core.windows.net/data/Pratham%20during%20Pandemic%20Lessons%20from%20the%20community.pdf)

[ ](https://www.facebook.com/PrathamEducationFoundation/ "Pratham on
Facebook") [ ](https://www.linkedin.com/company/pratham "Pratham on Linkedin")
[ ](https://www.youtube.com/user/prathamfoundation "Pratham on Youtube") [
](https://instagram.com/prathameducation "Pratham on Instagram") [
](https://twitter.com/Pratham_India "Twitter")

Get Involved

[ Job Opportunities](https://pratham.org/get-involved/job-opportunities/)

[ Internships](https://pratham.org/get-involved/internships/)

Delhi Office

B- 4/59, Safdarjung Enclave  
1st Floor, New Delhi - 110 029  
Email: [info@pratham.org](mailto:info@pratham.org)  
Contact number: 01141651638

Mumbai Office

Y.B. Chavan Center, 4th Floor,  
Gen. J. Bhosale Marg. Nariman Point  
Mumbai, Maharashtra - 400021  
Email: [info@pratham.org](mailto:info@pratham.org)  
Contact number: 022 22819561  
022 22819562

__

[ ](https://www.facebook.com/PrathamEducationFoundation/ "Pratham on
Facebook") [ ](https://www.linkedin.com/company/pratham "Pratham on Linkedin")
[ ](https://www.youtube.com/user/prathamfoundation "Pratham on Youtube") [
](https://instagram.com/prathameducation "Pratham on Instagram") [
](https://twitter.com/Pratham_India "Pratham on X Twitter")

