Skip to content

__[![Pratham](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/pratham-
logo.svg)](https://pratham.org/)

  * [About Us](https://pratham.org/about/)
    * [Board](https://pratham.org/about/board/)
    * [Leadership](https://pratham.org/about/leadership/)
    * [Partners](https://pratham.org/about/partners/)
    * [Teaching at the Right Level](https://pratham.org/about/teaching-at-the-right-level/)
    * [Recognition](https://pratham.org/about/recognition/)
    * [What’s New](https://pratham.org/about/news/)
    * [Legal & Financial Information](https://pratham.org/about/legal-financial-information/)
  * Programs
    * [Education](https://pratham.org/programs/education/)
      * [Hamara Gaon](https://pratham.org/about/hamara-gaon/)
      * [Early Childhood Education](https://pratham.org/programs/education/early-childhood-education/)
      * [Elementary](https://pratham.org/programs/education/elementary/)
      * [Second Chance](https://pratham.org/slider/second-chance-slider/)
      * [Digital Initiatives](https://pratham.org/programs/education/digital-initiatives/)
    * [Vocational Training](https://pratham.org/programs/education/vocational-training/)
    * [Pratham Council For Vulnerable Children](https://pratham.org/programs/pratham-council-for-vulnerablechildren/)
    * [Annual Status of Education Report](https://pratham.org/programs/education/aser/)
  * Get Involved
    * [Job Opportunities](https://pratham.org/get-involved/job-opportunities/)
    * [Internships](https://pratham.org/get-involved/internships/)
  * Resources
    * [Pratham Digital](https://prathamopenschool.org/)
    * [Stories of Change](https://pratham.org/impact/)
    * [Blogs](https://pratham.org/blogs/)
    * Campaigns
      * [IAmPratham](https://pratham.org/iampratham/)
      * [Daan utsav](https://pratham.org/daan-utsav-2/)
      * [CAMaL Ka Camp](https://pratham.org/camal-ka-camp-2023/)
    * [Publications](https://pratham.org/resources/publications/)
    * [Annual Reports](https://pratham.org/about/annual-reports/)
  * [Contact](https://pratham.org/contact/)

[Donate](https://www.pratham.org/get-involved/donate)

[What's New](https://pratham.org/category/news/)

# Pratham: a movement, born in India, spreading in Botswana and beyond

20  Feb  2020

[__Pratham Education Foundation](https://pratham.org/author/pratham/)
__[What's New](https://pratham.org/category/news/)

_by Noam Angrist, Moitshepi Matsheng, Thato Letsomo, and Sunshine Ntshambiwa,
leaders of_[ _Young 1ove_](https://www.young1ove.org/) _, one of the largest
youth NGOs in Botswana. Young 1ove is committed to scaling-up health and
education programs backed by rigorous evidence._

The first time we saw Pratham in action was in Zambia in June 2016. We were
attending one of the first trainings Pratham had ever conducted in Africa.
Usha Rane and Meera Tendolkar were the head trainers, both long-time Pratham
leaders, and sisters, whose motherly affection captured the room instantly.
The room was cramped, filled with dozens of government officials committed to
improving basic literacy and numeracy skills for their students.

Pratham was training on Teaching at the Right Level (TaRL). TaRL is an
approach to teach basic literacy and numeracy through fun activities targeted
to the level of each child. For example, reading a word or doing 2-digit
addition, rather than teaching to a uniform grade-level curriculum. The
program has been evaluated for over 15 years by the [Abdul Latif Jameel
Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL)](https://www.povertyactionlab.org/) at MIT and
shown to be one of the most cost-effective ways to improve learning.

Thato Letsomo, our training manager, and Noam Angrist, our co-founder, left
the training with over 20 activities buzzing in their heads, a bit unsure on
where to start, but inspired to do _something_.

So, we did.

We conducted an assessment, a census in two regions, to see if the program was
needed in Botswana. The findings showed a pressing need: 90 percent of
students could not do 2-digit division in grade 5, and 40 percent could not
read a simple story.

With a clear need identified and motivated to act, we partnered with the
Ministry of Basic Education and UNICEF. In the last few years, we have reached
10% of primary schools in Botswana.

The results have been striking: In the most recent term, almost 70% of
students learned to do division just 30 days into the program.

Since the first initial trip to Zambia, Pratham has twice visited Botswana to
support our scale-up effort with the government. We have also partnered with
Pratham and J-PAL to be an _innovation hub_ for an Africa-wide scale-up effort
supported by Co-Impact. But we had not been to India.

In November 2019, supported by the People’s Action for Learning network, we
jumped at the opportunity to see Pratham on their home turf where Teaching at
the Right Level was born and developed over decades.

We weren’t sure exactly what we were going to learn -- we had already been
trained, supported, had been in the implementation trenches for three years
and seen strong results -- but we knew we would learn something.

The trip started with a flight from Nepal where we had attended the People’s
Action for Learning network conference. Rukmini Banerji, Pratham’s CEO, Wilima
Wadhwa, the Director of the ASER Center, the sister organization of Pratham
that conducts large-scale learning assessments across India, Thato and Noam
flew to Delhi together.

After a brief flight delay -- which we took advantage of to hop out of the
airport and eat a delicious lunch in Kathmandu -- we arrived in Delhi, where
our colleagues Moitshepi Matsheng, Young 1ove’s co-founder and the chair of
the Botswana government’s National Youth Council, and Sunshine Ntshambiwa, a
Young 1ove training guru, met up for an action-packed 10-day trip.

![](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/Untitled-300x225.png)

A warm welcome

We met with Sarvendra Vikram Singh, a senior government official in the
department of education in Uttar Pradesh. He had recently overseen a rollout
of Teaching at the Right Level to over 8 million children in hundreds of
thousands of schools. He was so invested that he had sent direct messages to
teachers implementing the program to show he was paying attention and cared.

The program was now slowing down, due to reforms being rolled out, but Pratham
and the Uttar Pradesh government had seized the opportunity to massively
scale-up and countless lives had been changed for the better.

When we shared that Botswana had 750 primary schools in total, he looked at us
with a smile, and asked, ‘Why are you not already in all of them?’

We spent time in schools in urban areas in Lucknow and the rural villages of
Uttar Pradesh, followed by more field visits in Nagpur. Students sat in
circles on the floor, alongside friendly instructors, including teachers and
young volunteers. Each student’s eyes were wide and fingers pointed along to
number and word problems scribbled all across the room.

![](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/a-300x226.png)

Noam joins students ‘at the right level’

Seeing teaching at the right level where it was born, with nearly every child
hyper-engaged in the learning progress, made it look easy. But having just
started to rollout teaching at the right level in Botswana, we could
appreciate just how hard it must have been to have achieve such a seismic
shift from the status _quo_ in the education system.

In Botswana, when we asked students to sit on the floor, we had to send
letters home to each and every parent to ensure students packed extra clothes
to change out of their uniforms.

In order to convince instructors to sit on the floor with students and let the
child speak more than the teacher, we had to convince them first to practice
delivering the program, to appreciate the magic of doing things differently.

We had to get large-scale community buy-in to eliminate corporal punishment so
students were not fearful of being wrong and were comfortable revealing when
they didn’t understand a concept – after all, you can only teach at the right
level if you know the right level.

Once corporal punishment vanished, the students were free, but little learning
was taking place as the students treated the classroom like an indoor
playground. So we introduced positive behavioral management strategies, such
as call and responses and instructional song and dance, to combine learning
and fun.

[We even tried some tricks of the trade in
India](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y1v2WluAAEQ&feature=youtu.be). While it
was hard to make all of these things happen, once we did, _it worked_. And
that was the most remarkable thing of all – worlds and cultures apart, our
students in Botswana and the students in India were similar: With a dose of
targeted, playful, instruction, their eyes lit up as they relished the
opportunity to receive a quality education.

In schools in Nagpur, we were accompanied by Usha who introduced us to the
district commissioner, school management, and joined us in the classroom.

In the middle of a riveting TaRL session, Usha noticed one of the math
problems was too hard. She immediately sent a Whatsapp message to
headquarters. That’s Pratham –- even the most senior leaders are deeply
connected to the day-to-day learning process.

We are obsessed with helping kids learn ever better, unsatisfied with their
already [research-backed, Nobel-worthy, world-
class](https://www.teachingattherightlevel.org/how-this-years-nobel-prize-
winners-have-helped-to-shape-an-education-revolution-in-africa/) results.

In each city and village we visited, we had the opportunity to meet staff who
had been with Pratham for _decades_. They beamed with pride as they shared
their Pratham journey. Somraj Giradkar, state head in Maharashtra, has been
with Pratham for over 16 years, starting as a volunteer, then leading a
district, a division and being promoted to state head in 2012.

![](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/b-300x225.png)

Sunshine, Thato, Tshepi, Sam and Usha appreciate learning materials in the
school

Every organization is an amalgamation of its people, and the Pratham team
members we met were leaders of practice in every sense of the word -- expert,
inspiring, and committed.

We also met Shobini Mukerji, Executive Director of J-PAL South Asia, and her
team, including Harini Kannan and Meghna Pradhan. Shobini and Harini had been
directly involved in multiple Teaching at the Right Level randomized trials.

We got their take, including the breakthrough trial where the government
education system delivered the intervention at scale with strong learning
outcomes. Key features included government leaders conducting practice classes
directly and dedicated coaching support.

The symbiotic relationship between J-PAL and Pratham, and thus between
research and large-scale action, was palpable. Shobini herself had worked at
Pratham before leading the J-PAL South Asia office.

![](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/c-300x225.png)

Thato, Noam and Devyani join the ECD program

In addition to seeing Teaching at the Right Level in action, we saw many other
Pratham programs. Devyani Pershad, head of International Collaborations,
showed us Pratham’s newest PraDigi platform for digital self-teaching in
remote areas using tablets, and their early childhood development (ECD)
programs delivered in government _Anganwadi_ centers.

While each program was unique, there were striking similarities. The ECD
program has an assessment tool to enable targeted instruction and closely
track results on a continual basis. Pratham facilitators worked hand-in-hand
with government leaders in a public-private model that married innovation with
scale.

Beyond the work, we enjoyed food and reflections with the Pratham leadership
team. Over lunch with Samyukta Lakshman and Manushi Yadav, we reflected on
India’s history and explored ancient forts. Rukmini gifted us _kurtas_ , which
we duly wore to a laugh-filled dinner at Devyani’s home. Usha dashed to the
market one evening after a packed day of meetings with senior government
officials and school visits to ensure we had stylish scarves. We enjoyed
delicious _dal_ over dinner with Rukmini and Madhav Chavan, co-founder of
Pratham. A few days later, once the lentils had digested, Madhav pushed us:
Why not scale faster?

Our greatest takeaway from the trip ties directly to that question. We saw
with our own eyes Pratham’s vast reach, and an organizational DNA that had
cultivated scalability.

Pratham is committed for the long haul and develops leaders of practice from
within over decades. Pratham has seized and adapted to opportunities rather
than followed a linear, staged path, in the form of state government rollouts
to millions when the time was ripe, and ambassadors who set up Pratham
chapters almost entirely on their own accord.

![](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/d-300x225.png)

Devyani, Rukmini, Manushi, Thato, Samyukta, Sunshine and Noam

![](https://pratham.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/e-300x263.png)

Sunshine, Noam, Madhav, Thato & Moitshepi

In a sense, this approach is consistent with the philosophy of Teaching at the
Right Level – rather than follow a curriculum, better to adapt to each and
every situation and seize the moment.

Rather than carbon copy a standardized package, Pratham’s leaders spread seeds
with a common fiber, observe where they start to sprout, and water the soil
until the flowers bloom.

Our biggest takeaways from our trip to India weren’t programmatic; they were
organizational. We saw how Pratham is, in the truest sense, a family, bursting
with passion, hearty debate, and a life-long commitment, in schools and at the
dinner table.

Second, Pratham — one of the largest education organizations in India — is in
fact not an organization, it’s a movement. We’re excited to have joined it.

Now, it’s time we reach all schools in Botswana, and beyond.

About Us

[ About Pratham](https://pratham.org/about/)

[ Board](https://pratham.org/about/board/)

[ Leadership](https://pratham.org/about/leadership/)

[ Partners](https://pratham.org/about/partners/)

Programs

[ Education](https://pratham.org/programs/education/)

[ Vocational Training ]()

[ Annual Status of Education
Report](https://pratham.org/programs/education/aser/)

[ Pratham Council For Vulnerable
Children](https://pratham.org/programs/pratham-council-for-
vulnerablechildren/)

[ Covid Response](https://pratham.org/covid-19-response/)

[ Learning Readiness & Catch
Up](https://pratham.org/covid-19-response/prathams-community-based-campaign-
for-learning-readiness-catch-up/)

[ Lessons from the
Pandemic](https://prathamorg.blob.core.windows.net/data/Pratham%20during%20Pandemic%20Lessons%20from%20the%20community.pdf)

[ ](https://www.facebook.com/PrathamEducationFoundation/ "Pratham on
Facebook") [ ](https://www.linkedin.com/company/pratham "Pratham on Linkedin")
[ ](https://www.youtube.com/user/prathamfoundation "Pratham on Youtube") [
](https://instagram.com/prathameducation "Pratham on Instagram") [
](https://twitter.com/Pratham_India "Twitter")

Get Involved

[ Job Opportunities](https://pratham.org/get-involved/job-opportunities/)

[ Internships](https://pratham.org/get-involved/internships/)

Delhi Office

B- 4/59, Safdarjung Enclave  
1st Floor, New Delhi - 110 029  
Email: [info@pratham.org](mailto:info@pratham.org)  
Contact number: 01141651638

Mumbai Office

Y.B. Chavan Center, 4th Floor,  
Gen. J. Bhosale Marg. Nariman Point  
Mumbai, Maharashtra - 400021  
Email: [info@pratham.org](mailto:info@pratham.org)  
Contact number: 022 22819561  
022 22819562

__

[ ](https://www.facebook.com/PrathamEducationFoundation/ "Pratham on
Facebook") [ ](https://www.linkedin.com/company/pratham "Pratham on Linkedin")
[ ](https://www.youtube.com/user/prathamfoundation "Pratham on Youtube") [
](https://instagram.com/prathameducation "Pratham on Instagram") [
](https://twitter.com/Pratham_India "Pratham on X Twitter")

